the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976
publishers note the pike committee
report includes extensive footnotes the
footnotes are too substantial to be both
included here and maintain the
listenable narrative thus the footnotes
were excluded from this audiobook
version interested listeners can find
them in the original PDF version of the
report available on archive.org section
to the select committees investigative
record a costs quote no money shall be
drawn from the Treasury but in
consequence of appropriations made by
law and a regular statement and account
of the receipts and expenditures of all
public money shall be published from
time to time end quote
article 1 section 9 US Constitution
money and spending were the first topics
of committee hearings this choice of a
beginning was founded on constitutional
responsibilities and it implemented a
straightforward investigative technique
by following the dollars the committee
would locate activities and priorities
of our intelligence services the inquiry
was fruitful and interesting by the time
it was over General Accounting Office
accountants on loan to the committee had
concluded that the foreign intelligence
budget is three to four times more
costly than Congress has been told an
Office of Management and Budget review
of the domestic intelligence budget
conducted at the committee's request
concluded that it may be five times the
estimate given to Congress by federal
officials totals do not tell the whole
story congressional and executive
scrutiny of these budgets was found to
range somewhere between cursory and
non-existent spending controls by the
agencies themselves were likewise often
inadequate as a few preliminary examples
indicate a CIA station in a small
country spent 41 thousand dollars on
liquor in one year taxpayer
were spent to provide heads of state
with female companions and to pay people
with questionable reputations to make
pornographic movies for blackmail the
accommodation procurement mechanism was
used to buy limousines for foreign
dignitaries with cash payments that were
difficult to verify a huge arsenal of
weapons and access to ammunition has
been developed by CIA giving it a
capability that exceeds most armies of
the world a middleman who is a close
friend of top FBI officials attacked
thousands if not millions of dollars of
unwarranted markups on to covert
purchases these examples reflect the
wide range of problems with secret
financing of secret activities a more
detailed review of these and other
examples along with the basic processes
or mechanisms that accompany them is a
good base for suggested reforms one
deceptive budgets much attention is paid
to numbers when the foreign and domestic
intelligence budgets are prepared not
much attention is paid to substance the
Office of Management and Budget OMB the
director of Central Intelligence DCI and
other officials go through an elaborate
process in arriving at budget numbers as
described to Congress it is an
impressive procedure what is not
described as the close almost inbred
relationship between OMB officials and
intelligence budget makers OMB also does
not point out that it completely lacks
the expertise to evaluate huge
technological expenditures by the
National Security Agency executive
officials do not stress the lack of a
centralized budget authority in the
intelligence services which causes
enormous waste duplication and hidden
costs in military intelligence there's
little consideration given to the
extraordinary spending latitude granted
to CIA more to CIA's heavy use of unfund
there is no explanation from F
i of the reasons for millions of dollars
of confidential purchases when appearing
before Congress executive branch
officials do not review the inadequacies
of internal agency auditors no mention
is made of items transferred elsewhere
in the federal budget to keep the
intelligence budget small these
officials do not remind Congress that
our government's auditors the General
Accounting Office have been denied
access to secret intelligence budgets
for more than a decade they do not
explain abuses of covert purchasing
mechanisms domestic as well as foreign
these same officials do however stress
that anything they can or will say must
be kept a secret all this adds up to
more than 10 billion dollars being spent
by a handful of people with little
independent supervision with inadequate
controls even less auditing and an
overabundance of secrecy it begins with
OMB officials and their counterparts in
the various agencies testimony before
this committee revealed that only six
OMB employees work full-time on the
foreign intelligence budget of those six
three are former CIA employees in turn
the CIA official in charge of the
agency's budget has recently arrived
from OMB where he had primary
responsibility for CIA's budget this in
itself does not bode well for a vigorous
review of the merits of intelligence
programs it is set back further by the
fact that OMB is not told of sensitive
projects as they are being planned even
after it is told OMB z' officials are
not free to evaluate all details of
sensitive projects the absence of real
involvement by outsiders and
intelligence spending continues for
example CIA's budget appears as only a
single line item in the published
federal budget this is done in the name
of secrecy but it gives CIA an unusual
advantage Congress requires any agency
which
to transfer funds from one line item to
another to come back to Congress for
approval this is called reprogramming
most agencies have many line items
giving Congress some check on their
spending CIA has had no reprogramming
problems in the past it could tell
Congress it was spending a certain
amount on covert action then proceeded
to transfer large amounts to covert
programs without Congress's approval
this is not however the most significant
lack of knowledge about intelligent
spending billions of dollars spent every
year for intelligence are not included
in the official intelligence budgets one
way this has been accomplished has been
by shifting items that have
traditionally appeared in the
intelligence budget into other budget
categories for example the Department of
Defense has switched the following items
by reclassifying them as communications
counterintelligence and investigative
activities mapping charting and geodesy
and the advanced location strike program
a sizable secret reconnaissance activity
at defense was switched to research and
development all of the activities and
many more were until recently and
defense's intelligence budget defense is
not alone in using this tactic the costs
given Congress for military intelligence
do not include expenditures for tactical
military intelligence which would
approximately double intelligence
budgets for the three Armed Services
roughly 20% of the National Security
Agency's budget is not added into the
intelligence budget it should be noted
that NSA does nothing else except gather
and analyze technical intelligence and
it has one of the largest budgets in the
intelligence community sometimes entire
agencies such as the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency are completely
omitted from estimates of intelligence
related costs as well as the
intelligence budget the budget for the
national security council is omitted
completely although a sizeable portion
of their staff and subcommittees work
exclusively on intelligence matters
still another technique is under
valuation of the real cost of certain
operations the committee analyzed one
covert operation and found that the
dollar amounts given by CIA for weapons
supplied or about half of the Defense
Department's contract prices at the
committee's request OMB did add up the
total cost for all federal domestic
intelligence for the first time ever the
total they came up with was more than
five times the amount that had been
given to the committee and testimony by
domestic intelligence officials the FBI
for example had neglected to include
such clear intelligence functions as the
National bomb data center or
counterintelligence more significantly
there had never been an attempt to add
up all the divergent intelligence
operations in the federal government by
using the new OMB figures for domestic
intelligence and by adding such items as
transferred expenditures the full NSA
budget and revalued cost figures the
committee estimated that the cost of
intelligence today is at least three to
four times the amount reported to
Congress an obvious question is how can
there be such a difference in total cost
estimates one answer is the lack of
coordination and approaching the budget
another is that there are no adequate
standards for what is and is not
intelligent spending a final answer may
be that there is a conscious desire to
keep the totals small by dividing and
confusing the estimates it should be
obvious that if nobody has ever added up
the costs of the many domestic
intelligence units then certainly nobody
is coordinating their budgets as
intelligence per se in foreign
intelligence the problem is to a large
degree a lack of centralized Authority
for example the DCI presents the entire
foreign intelligence budget to Congress
and the president but he only has
authority for CIA
budget defense officials testified that
a substantial part of their intelligence
budget is considered the responsibility
of the Secretary of Defense the DCI they
say merely reviews their work fragmented
authority leads to overall coordination
problems a good illustration is the
existence of separate
counterintelligence budgets in FBI CIA
NSA dia Army Navy and Air Force some are
included in the intelligence budget some
are not some coordinate with other
counterintelligence programs some do not
the FBI testified for example that it
does not know if CIA has a
counterintelligence group that it does
not know how much CIA's operations cost
and that it does not know if CIA
duplicates FBI's work fragmented
authority and coordination leave the
budget wide open to distortions each
agency applies its own budget standards
particularly because there is no uniform
standard there is for example no
standard for allocating the cost of a
military base whose primary purpose is
to support intelligence operations the
repair of a submarine damaged on
intelligence duty may or may not be
included in intelligence costs the
committee asked OMB Gao and all the
intelligence agencies for their
standards for allocating support costs
no agency had any to offer no agency had
even a basic definition of intelligence
in a statement prepared for the
committee the DCI made it clear that
there are no good definitions in use
today as he said quote in essence it
boils down to a judgement call
end quote the committee has compiled its
own set of suggested guidelines in
addition a good first step would be to
include the same items in the
intelligence budget from one year to the
next
this alone would have prevented the
official intelligence budgets from
remaining at constant levels over the
past few years we
is fundamentally deceptive to an absence
of accountability the General Accounting
Office Gao is the auditing arm of
Congress when it comes to intelligence
agencies that arm is no arm at all in
its early years Gao was generally
limited to an auditing function with the
passage of time Congress has turned to
Gao for more than balancing books today
under authority of law Gao is empowered
to analyze the economy and efficiency
with which government funds are spent
the Comptroller General who heads Gao
testified that he cannot even balance
CIA's books let alone analyze its
efficiency he testified that he has no
idea how much money the United States
spends on intelligence specifically he
said that from 1962 Gao has made no
attempt to audit the CIA because it was
allowed scant access to classified
spending last year Gao was directed to
compile basic budgetary information on
federal investigative and intelligence
functions it was refused information by
CIA NSA and intelligence agencies of the
Defense Department in another recent
instance the FBI refused to permit Gao
to examine case files the bureau offered
special summaries but refused to allow
any verification of those summaries the
executive agencies treatment of Gao is
curious in January 1966 the CIA entered
into a sole source contract with the
management consulting firm of peat
Marwick livingston and company for a
total contract price of fifty five
thousand seven hundred twenty-five
dollars CIA could have saved taxpayers
some money if it had given Gao access
CIA officials conceded that these
independent consultants were given
complete and free access to all
classified procurement documents as well
as all personnel concerned with
agency procurement activities in June
1966 the firm completed its work and
issued a full report of findings and
recommendations a cover memorandum
addressed to the Inspector General
expressed appreciation for the agency's
full cooperation by contrast this
committee's staff encountered lengthy
delays in gaining limited access to
similar documents and personnel
including the report of peat Marwick
Livingston & Company the issue is not
really whether Congress with
constitutional responsibility for
federal spending should have equal
access with a private company the issue
is whether an objective look at secret
expenditures ever takes place it does
not take place at OMB Gao cannot look
even this congressional investigating
committee has tested access and come up
wanting to intelligence agencies
themselves adequately audit their own
operations no the CIA is a good example
their audits staff is undermanned for a
comprehensive review of complex and
extensive agency spending that takes
place worldwide they are allowed to
balance books but they are not always
allowed to know the exact purpose of
expenditures only 5% of all vouchered
transactions are checked even though
these add up to 20% of CIA's entire
budget substantive corroborating records
are not kept their audits deviate from
the standards of professional certified
public accountants and CIA has not
compiled a list of these exceptions to
control the deviances these and other
shortcomings in audit and control for
both foreign and domestic intelligence
agencies lead to an inevitable result
spending abuses three spending abuses
the easiest way to illustrate problems
encountered in secret spending is to
examine a number of mechanisms currently
in use and a number of situations that
have grown out of those mechanisms
a covert procurement many CIA covert
actions and clandestine operations must
be supported in a non attributable
manner which led CIA to establish a
covert procurement branch
unfortunately covert procurement has
become an overused expensive and often
uncontrollable technique for
questionable purchasing the branches
activities include support of overseas
stations and the procurement of weapons
and paramilitary materials to facilitate
these requirements covert procurement
has under its control a number of
operational proprieties and notional
companies notional companies are merely
paper firms with appropriate stationery
and checking accounts these companies
make requests to the proprietaries so
the proprietary can bill an apparently
legitimate company for covert
requirements needless to say it is an
expensive way to buy a refrigerator and
should not be used unnecessarily when an
overseas station requires an item that
cannot be traced to the United States
government it sends a requisition with a
special code one code is for items that
should not be traceable to CIA another
code means it should not be traceable to
the US government theoretically once
these codes called sterility codes are
attached there is no more traceable
involvement with the government however
the committee reviewed documents which
showed that items purchased in a non
traceable manner are sometimes
transported by US military air pouch
rather than sent by private carrier as a
truly non-government purchase would be
another procurement which the committee
staff questioned was the routing of
requests for small quantity low cost and
even non-traceable items through the
expense of covert process the logical
alternative would be to have the item
purchased either overseas or here with
petty cash avoiding the expense of
covert procurement these include such
items
as quantities of ballpoint pens
ping-pong paddles or hams the staff was
also unable to determine the reason for
certain high-cost items being purchased
through this mechanism hundreds of
refrigerators televisions cameras and
watches are purchased each year along
with a variety of home furnishings the
question is why an American television
would be purchased here and sent to
Europe if someone was trying to conceal
his involvement with the United States
this is especially true because the
power requirements abroad are different
and a transformer has to be installed on
an appliance bought in the US before it
will work in fact a large percentage of
electrical appliances did not have
transformers added which raises the
possibility that these items are being
covertly purchased for use in the United
States the same question arises with the
purchases of home furnishings a review
of overseas station purchases showed for
example the one station bought more than
100 thousand dollars of furnishings in
the past few years in that context
additional covert purchases here at home
seem excessive finally why not buy a
Smithfield ham through normal purchasing
channels there is no way that ham could
be traced to the CIA or the US
government no matter how it was bought
as in every other component of the
agency the effort to maintain secrecy
even within the branch itself is highly
emphasized the committee was told that
because proprietary employees do not
have a need to know they are not put in
a position to question any request the
agency might make three hi procurement
officials have conceded that the
sterility code is not questioned by the
covert procurement staff the 1966 study
by peat Marwick livingston and company
stated that there was an excessive use
of these codes without justification the
committee's investigation indicates that
the situation has not been remedied
be local procurement the committee's
investigation of the covert procurement
mechanism led to a review of records
from local or enfield procurement the
staff reviewed records for the past five
fiscal years from three typical overseas
stations varying in size and number of
employees overspending and under
auditing seemed to be prevalent an
example is a medium-sized station that
purchased over eighty six thousand
dollars in liquor and cigarettes during
the past five years the majority of
these purchases were designated
operational gifts gifts to friendly
agents or officials in return for
information or assistance it would
appear that spending practices have an
uncanny way of changing with new station
Chiefs a station that purchased
forty-one thousand dollars in liquor in
1971 had a new chief in 1972 liquor
purchases dropped to twenty five
thousand dollars which is still a lot of
liquor one station had purchased over
$175,000 in furnishings for leased
quarters and safe houses in an effort to
determine whether this kind of spending
is questioned by CIA auditors the staff
interviewed the CIA audit official who
audited these stations he recalled the
liquor and the when he inquired as to
the quantity he was told by the station
chief that they would quote try to hold
it down in the future
end quote the same auditor had audited
the station that purchased over $175,000
in furnishings when questioned he was
not even aware of the total figure this
experience led the committee staff to
interview several members of the
internal audit division as well as eight
overseas case officers and chiefs of
station from these interviews several
things became apparent auditors do not
perform thorough reviews of case
officers advance accounts at all
overseas stations each case officer is
allotted in advance which is nothing
more than a petty cash fund from this
fund the
sir pays operation expenses and the
salaries of his agents he is required by
agency regulations to obtain a receipt
for every expenditure but due to
manpower considerations these are only
spot-checked when audited which is not
often such funds run into millions of
dollars each year every case officer and
internal audit officer conceded that the
agency must quote rely solely on the
integrity of its case officers end quote
when a case officers agents refused to
sign receipts the case officer certifies
that he expended the funds a case
officer might have as many as 10 agents
working for him each of whom may receive
between $50 and $3,000 per month all in
cash
finally audits of all overseas stations
are not performed on a regular basis it
may be two or three years or more before
a station is audited even then the
committee discovered that
recommendations made by auditors are
usually not disclosed in the auditor's
report to headquarters see accommodation
procurements in addition to procuring
goods and services for its own use
CIA makes accommodation procurements for
foreign governments officials agents and
others the agency serves more or less as
a purchasing agent for an undisclosed
principle although the individual for
whom the accommodation procurement was
made advances the necessary funds or
repays the agency after delivery the
indirect administrative costs are borne
by American taxpayers these costs
include the salary of the agency
purchaser certain transportation charges
accounting costs and in some cases the
salaries of training and technical
personnel in investigating one series of
accommodation procurements the committee
learned that a foreign government
received a 20% discount by having CIA
buy equipment in the name of the US
government if the foreign government had
contracted for the same items in its own
name this discount
would not have been available in just
two of these actions CIA saved the
foreign government over $200,000 at the
expense of American suppliers the agency
will usually refuse to make such
procurements only if the requested item
might appear to be beyond the requesters
financial means and might therefore give
rise to questions about the requesters
sources of income agency security
officers feel that such questions might
lead to disclosure of the requesters
relationship with the agency
accommodation procurements involving
less than $3,000 require only the
approval of a CIA chief of station when
larger sums are involved approval must
be obtained from the deputy director for
operations when the amount is more than
$500,000 it must also be approved by the
Director of Central Intelligence the
committee examined a number of
accomodation procurement records the
following two examples illustrate that
the facilities and resources of the
United States government are sometimes
used to satisfy little more than the
whims of foreign officials in one
instance a foreign official described
his son's enthusiasm for model airplanes
to the chief of station the foreign
official wanted three model airplane
kits and even advised the CIA officer
precisely where the kids could be
purchased in the United States a cable
was sent to agency headquarters asking
for the purchase of three kits from the
store in Baltimore suggested by the
foreign official further the cable
instructed that the items were to be
designated by a sterility code to
indicate that the purchase of the kits
could not be attributable to the United
States government documents provided to
the committee in this case by the agency
were sanitized in another instance the
president of an allied nation was
preparing to play golf on a hot
afternoon anticipating his thirst after
several hours in the Sun he made a
priority request to the local chief of
station for six bottles of Gatorade
an agency employee was immediately
relieved of his ordinary duties and
assigned to make the accommodation
procurement nor was this the chief of
States only experience with the agency's
merchandising talents in the past the
agency has purchased for him several
automobiles including at least two
custom-built armored limousines and
among other things an entire electronic
security system for his official
residence it is worth noting that these
security devices are being supplied to a
man who runs a police state
accommodation procurements have also
involved more expensive and politically
sensitive items for example another head
of a one-party state had long been
fascinated by certain highly
sophisticated electronic intelligence
gathering equipment he wished to develop
his own independent collection
capability as an accommodation and to
share the take the agency procured an
entire electronic intelligence network
for him in two phases phase one involved
contract costs in excess of $850,000 and
Phase two cost more than $500,000 in
investigating one series of
accommodation procurements for an oil
exporting country the committee asked
CIA officials about the coordination and
effect of the agency's purchasing favors
on the foreign country's oil pricing
policy the country's oil policy
incidentally has not been among the most
favorable to the United States agency
officials were uncertain as to the
effect but they indicated that the two
policies are largely considered separate
issues in return for making
accommodation procurements the agency is
usually reimbursed by the requesting
party although reimbursement may be in
US dollars it is usually made in local
foreign currency the committee was
unable to learn whether the agency has
any firm policy on what rate of currency
exchange is to be used in making
reimbursement in many countries US
Dollars exchanged
or local currency at the official rate
bring fewer units of local currency then
if exchanged at an unofficial but more
commonly used rate D research and
development CIA has long prided itself
on technological capability and many of
its projects operate at far reaches of
the state-of-the-art such
accomplishments are made by the agency
with assistance and advice from the
private sector each year
CIA's deputy director for science and
technology enters into hundreds of
contracts with industry usually in the
name of other government agencies these
contracts total millions of dollars for
agency contracts alone not only does the
agency contract for its own research and
development programs but also for
national intelligence programs total
contracts for both programs amount to
hundreds of millions of dollars annually
committee staff interviewed numerous
members of the Science and Technology
staff a major target of this
investigation was contractor selection
practices although mr. Colby testified
before the committee that CIA has
established management controls to
ensure that contracting is carried out
according to the intent of Congress the
investigation revealed that 84 percent
of these contracts are sole source
contracts staff also examined cost
overrun aspects of research and
development contracting CIA claimed two
and one-half percent of all research and
development contracts involved cost
overruns of 15% or more there is no
reason to doubt the figures however
certain caveats must be considered
contractors cost estimates in sole
source contracts can easily be inflated
to cover anticipated cost increases
overruns can also be labeled changes in
scope in several interviews with
contracting officers by the book answers
were given to questions regarding which
officer is authorized and does accept
contract changes however
one former agency contracting officer
indicated that to a considerable degree
the technical representative actually
makes the contractual decisions and the
contracting officer then has to catch up
by preparing contract amendments to
legitimize changes already made another
target of the investigation was the
disposal of government furnished
equipment GFE regulations regarding GFE
appeared to be precise in determining
when to abandon this equipment however
the office of communications for example
contracted in 1965 with an electronics
company to do research work the contract
required the purchase of a large piece
of industrial equipment as well as
related testing equipment CIA provided
funds for the equipment as well as the
research the testing equipment cost
seventy four thousand dollars and the
industrial equipment over two hundred
forty three thousand dollars at the
termination of the contract in 1975 the
testing equipment was sold to the
contractor for $18,500 the large piece
of industrial was abandoned in place
calls to the manufacturer of this piece
of machinery as well as to experts in
the field of this particular type of
testing revealed that the machinery
which was abandoned while perhaps
useless to the agency was not a
worthless piece of equipment which
should have been abandoned according to
documents provided to the committee CIA
made no attempt to contact other
government agencies to see if the
chamber could have been used by another
agency II colleges and universities in
1967 ramparts magazine disclosed CIA
support to the National Students
Association as a result
President Johnson issued a flat
prohibition against covert assistance to
educational institutions but the agency
unilaterally reserved the right to and
does depart from the presidential order
when it has the need to do so there is
no evidence that the president author
this departure from the Johnson
directive as background President
Johnson had appointed a committee to
investigate the matter and make policy
recommendations under Secretary of State
Nicholas Katzenbach and CIA director
Richard H Helms served on the committee
it recommended that quote no federal
agency shall provide any covert
financial assistance or support direct
or indirect to any of the nation's
educational or private voluntary
organizations end quote on March 29th
1967 President Johnson issued a
statement accepting the recommendation
and directing quote all agencies of the
government to implement it fully end
quote
the agency then issued internal policy
statements to implement the president's
orders stating that whenever possible
the agency's identity and sponsorship
are to be made known but the agency was
to clearly retain the option of entering
into a covert contract with colleges and
universities after obtaining approval
from the deputy director for
administration mr. Carl Duquette deputy
director for science and technology
testified before the committee on
November 4th 1975 that the agency still
has ongoing contracts with quote a small
number of universities end quote mr.
Duquette also revealed that some of the
contracts involved classified work and
some are covert F us recording on
October 9th 1975 the Committee held
hearings on electronic surveillance in
the United States one of the witnesses
mr. Martin Kaiser was a manufacturer of
electronic surveillance and
countermeasure equipment in the course
of his testimony he revealed that all
sales of his equipment were routed
pursuant to FBI instructions through a
cutout or middleman u.s. recording
company of Washington DC the equipment
was neither modified nor serviced by US
recording Kaiser testified that he
delivered 80 percent of his
equipment directly to the FBI on one
such occasion Kaiser noticed an invoice
from us recording for equipment he had
supplied and it showed that us recording
had tacked on 30 percent more than it
had paid for the devices the markup
interested committee investigators
because according to Kaiser the
middleman had handled only paperwork and
deliveries the staff therefore acquired
records of all sales between us
recording and the FBI involving kaisers
equipment a committee staff accountant
did a detailed study and determined that
the 30 percent markup on the invoice
seen by mr. Kaiser was representative of
all such sales as a result of numerous
interviews it became apparent that mr.
Joseph Tait the president of US
recording was a longtime friend and
poker-playing companion of mr. John P
Moore the associate director of the FBI
in charge of administration until 1972
during the course of investigation the
staff learned the poker games had been
held at the Blue Ridge club near Harpers
Ferry West Virginia on several weekends
each year for the past decade guest
lists included FBI officials connected
with the administrative division OMB
officials and a procurement officer from
CIA the only non government officials at
the poker games were Tate and mr. Gus /
dick the president of Fargo
international a supplier of police
equipment to the FBI and CIA mr. Moore
had invited all the guests although mr.
Tate was the only person in the poker
games who possessed a membership in the
Blue Ridge Club interestingly the Blue
Ridge Club burned to the ground the
evening before two staff attorneys
traveled to Harpers Ferry to examine its
records most purchasing procedures of
the FBI are governed by General Services
Administration GSA regulations however
confidential contracts are not subject
to GSA regulations or supervision the
u.s. recording company was the sole
company serving as an eff
I cut out interviews revealed that there
was virtually no control exercised over
the confidential contracts between us
recording company to the FBI
neither the laboratory division which
initiated the equipment requisitions nor
the administrative division which
authorized the requisitions had any
knowledge of the percentage markup being
charged the General Services
Administration was consulted and gave an
opinion that an appropriate markup for
similar services would have been in the
five percent range
FBI's use of US recording was apparently
motivated by the need for secrecy and
purchases of sensitive electronic
equipment that justification appears
questionable in most instances FBI
laboratory division personnel negotiated
for equipment directly with the
manufacturers when manufacturers later
received purchase orders from US
recording for equipment with
corresponding model numbers quantities
and prices it was apparent that the
equipment was indeed going to FBI in
fact the FBI told Kaiser that they were
using US recording company and not to
worry about it FBI's use of US recording
represents a grossly inefficient
expenditure for intelligence equipment
similarly the fact that the persons
within the FBI responsible for
requisitioning and purchasing the
equipment had no clear knowledge of the
chain of authority regarding the
arrangement is at best nonfeasance
further ramifications are presently
being investigated by the criminal
division of the Justice Department and
by the IRS the committee has made its
information on this matter available to
both authorities for budget secrecy
during Senate hearings in 1973 to
confirm James Schlesinger as Secretary
of Defense mr. Schlesinger indicated it
might be possible to make public the
total budget cost of foreign
intelligence when William Colby was
confirmed as head of CIA in 1973 he
likewise testified that publication of
budget totals might not be harmful and
it
television interview some years later
dr. Schlesinger and advertently revealed
the size of the foreign intelligence
budget no great harm apparently came
from that disclosure in 1973 a
recommendation to publish the annual
costs of intelligence was made by a
Senate special committee to study
questions related to secret and
confidential documents on June 4th 1974
Senator Jay William Proxmire of
Wisconsin offered a floor amendment to a
defense procurement authorization bill
his amendment would have required the
Director of Central Intelligence to
provide Congress with an annual
unclassified report describing the total
amount requested for the National
Intelligence program in the budget
submitted by the president in June 1975
the report of the Rockefeller Commission
recommended that Congress carefully
consider whether all or part of the CIA
budget should be made public
on October 1st 1975 representative
Robert and GMO of Connecticut offered a
floor amendment to a defense
appropriations bill prohibiting any of
the funds provided for other procurement
airforce from being expended by the CIA
had the amendment been adopted a
subsequent amendment would have been
offered to restore funds for the CIA and
a specific total for the agency would
have been disclosed today however
taxpayers and most congressmen do not
know and cannot find out how much they
spend on spy activities this is in
direct conflict with the Constitution
which requires a regular and public
accounting for all funds spent by the
federal government those who argue for
secrecy do not mention the Constitution
they do not mention taxpayers instead
they talk of rather obscure
understandings the Russians might derive
about some specific operation even if
all the Russians knew was a single total
which would be in the billions of
dollars and would cover dozens of
diverse agencies how the Russians would
do this is not clear the committee asked
but there was no real answer what is
clear is that the Russians probably
already have a detailed account of our
intelligence spending far more than just
the budget total in all likelihood the
only people who care to know and do not
know these costs today are American
taxpayers
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you